==================
Gene finding
==================
Now that you have assembled the data into contigs next natural step to do is
annotation of the data, i.e. finding the genes and doing functional annotation
of those. For gene finding a range of programs are available (Metagene
Annotator, MetaGeneMark, Orphelia, FragGeneScan), here we will use Prodigal
which is very fast and has recently been enhanced for metagenomics. We will use
the -p flag which instructs Prodigal to use the algorithm suitable for
metagenomic data. We will use a dataset consisting of 11 samples from a time
series sampling of surface water in the Baltic Sea. Sequencing was done with
Illumina MiSeq here generating on average 835,048 2 x 250 bp reads per sample.
The reads can be found here::

    /proj/g2014113/metagenomics/comparative-functional-analysis/reads

The first four numbers in the filename represent a date. All samples are from
2012. R1 and R2 both contain one read of a pair. They are ordered, so the first
four lines in R1 are paired with the read in the first four lines of R2. They
are in CASAVA v1.8 format (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FASTQ_format).

A coassembly has already been made with Ray using all reads to save you some
time. You can find the contigs from a combined assembly on reads from all
samples here::

    /proj/g2014113/metagenomics/cfa/assembly/baltic-sea-ray-noscaf-41.1000.fa

They have been constructed with Ray using a kmer of 41 and no scaffolding. Only
contigs >= 1000 are in this file. The reason a coassembly is used is that we
can get an idea of the entire metagenome over multiple samples. By mapping the
reads back per sample we can compare coverages of contigs between samples.

**Question: What could be a possible advantage/disadvantage for the assembly
process when assembling multiple samples at one time?**

.. Advantage: more coverage. Disadvantage: more related strains/species makes
.. graph traversal harder

**Question: Can you think of other approaches to get a coassembly?**

.. Maybe map contigs against each other in merge them in that way. Preferably
.. taking coverages into account

Note that all solutions (i.e. the generated outputs) for the exercises are also in::

    /proj/g2014113/metagenomics/cfa/

In all the following exercises you should again use the virtual environment to
get all the necessary programs (unless you already loaded it ofc)::

    source /proj/g2014113/metagenomics/virt-env/mg-workshop/bin/activate

It’s time to run Prodigal. First create an output directory with a copy of the
contig file::

    mkdir -p ~/metagenomics/cfa/prodigal
    cd ~/metagenomics/cfa/prodigal
    cp /proj/g2014113/metagenomics/cfa/assembly/baltic-sea-ray-noscaf-41.1000.fa .

Then run Prodigal on the contig file (~2m20)::

    prodigal -a baltic-sea-ray-noscaf-41.1000.aa.fa \
             -d baltic-sea-ray-noscaf-41.1000.nuc.fa \
             -i baltic-sea-ray-noscaf-41.1000.fa \
             -f gff -p meta \
             > baltic-sea-ray-noscaf-41.1000.gff

This will produce 3 files:

    * ``-d`` a fasta file with the gene sequences (nucleotides)
    * ``-a`` a fasta file with the protein sequences (aminoacids)
    * ``stdout`` a gff file

The gff format is a standardised file type for showing annotations.It’s a tab
delimited file that can be viewed by e.g. ::

    less baltic-sea-ray-noscaf-41.1000.gff

Pass the option -S to less if you don’t want lines to wrap

An explanation of the gff format can be found at
http://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html

**Question: How many coding regions were found by Prodigal? Hint: use grep -c**

.. less *.gff | grep -c 'CDS'
.. 23577

**Question: How many contigs have coding regions? How many do not?**

.. less *.gff | grep '^contig' | grep 'CDS' | awk '{print $1}' | sort -u | wc -l
.. 8517
.. grep -c '^>cont' baltic-sea-ray-noscaf-41.1000.fa 
.. 8533
.. 8533-8517=16
